An approximately 20-person team at Ion Storm developed Deus Ex, a 
cyberpunk-themed action-role playing video game, over the course of 34 months, 
culminating in a June 2000 release. Team director and producer Warren Spector 
began to plan the game in 1993 after releasing Ultima Underworld II with Origin 
Systems and attempted the game both there and at Looking Glass Technologies 
before going into production with Ion Storm. Official preproduction began around 
August 1997, lasted for six months, and was followed by 28 months of production. 
Spector saw their work as expanding on the precedent set by Origin, Looking 
Glass, and Valve Corporation.

In preproduction, six people from Looking Glass's Austin studios focused on the 
setting ahead of the game mechanics, and chose a story centred around prominent 
conspiracy theories as an expression of the "millennial madness" in The X-Files 
and Men in Black. Spector felt that the development process's highlights were 
the "high-level vision" and length of preproduction, flexibility within the 
project, testable "proto-missions", and Unreal Engine license. Their pitfalls 
included the team structure, unrealistic goals, underestimating risks with 
artificial intelligence, their handling of proto-missions, and weakened morale 
from Daikatana's bad press. The game was published by Eidos Interactive and 
released on June 23, 2000 for Windows 95 and later versions, whereupon it earned 
over 30 "best of" awards in 2001.

After Warren Spector released Ultima Underworld II with Origin Systems in 
January 1993, he began to plan Troubleshooter, the game that would become Deus 
Ex.[1] Noting his wife's fascination with The X-Files, he connected the "real 
world, millennial weirdness, [and] conspiracy stuff" topics on his mind and 
decided to make a game about it that would appeal to a wider audience.[2] He 
also considered cyberpunk influences that came from around 1978 when he was 
participating in a themed Dungeons & Dragons campaign created and led by Bruce 
Sterling, who had adapted that campaign based on the choice Spector and the 
other players made.[3] Troubleshooter, in contrast to the other games he had 
been making at Origin, would have been a "real-world role-playing game", relying 
more on player choices and assuring that every player could reach the end of the 
game but in the manner they choose.[3]

In his 1994 proposal to Origin, he described the concept as "Underworld-style 
first-person action" in a real world setting with "big-budget, nonstop action" 
starring an ex-cop "security specialist".[4] He described the project as "high" 
risk for its "technological unknowns" as "probably the toughest project on his 
wish list".[4] It failed to get to production. He later left Origin for Looking 
Glass Technologies near the time that they were producing Thief: The Dark 
Project,[3] but kept the idea in mind. For Thief, he tried to suggest buffing 
the character more so that the player could opt to fight through levels instead 
of sneaking, the original intent of the game, but the team didn't take to these 
ideas.[3] He continued to change his character and game system plans for 
Troubleshooter, though the game he then called Junction Point did not reach 
production at Looking Glass.[1] Spector wrote that the timing was not yet ripe 
because the business teams were not interested, the technology was not yet 
feasible, he did not have an interested team or the resources to make one, and 
that publishers did not want a "first-person, cross-genre game".[4][a] Spector, 
himself, was also tired of unrealistic fantasy and alien settings.[4] Frustrated 
at Looking Glass, Spector sought employment elsewhere and was nearly about to 
sign a contract with Electronic Arts, when John Romero of Ion Storm approached 
him.[3] When Romero offered him a chance to make his "dream game" without any 
restrictions, Spector was immediately on board.[5]

Preproduction began around August 1997[6] and lasted about six months. The 
six-person team[1] came from Looking Glass's Austin studios.[7] Spector, the 
team's director and producer, saw their work as improving upon the foundation 
provided by Origin, Looking Glass, and Valve Corporation by doing what those 
companies did not.[6] The game's working title was Shooter: Majestic 
Revelations, with a scheduled release of Christmas 1998.[8] The working title 
was meant to be ironic because they did not want the game to be solely a 
first-person shooter.[4] They worked on the setting ahead of the game mechanics, 
and decided on a conspiracy-style story that referenced existing conspiracy 
theories such as Area 51, CIA drug trafficking, the John F. Kennedy 
assassination, the Majestic 12, and a Masonic underground bunker beneath Denver 
International Airport. Spector said their research helped them understand how 
conspiracy theorists think.[1] The team was also able to look to the real world 
in 1997 to find the rise of stories about terrorists and mechanically-augmented 
soldiers that they were able to build upon.[3] They also used this time to work 
out the backstory for constancy. The team designed over 200 characters without 
associated in-game roles, which was both helpful when designing missions and 
unhelpful as they attempted to reduce their scope.[1] In the third quarter of 
1997, Spector wrote a "manifesto" on his ideal game and the "rules of 
role-playing" that was later published in the February 1999 Game Developer 
magazine.[1] His principles included "problems, not puzzles", "no forced 
failure", "players do; NPCs watch", and "areas with multiple entrance and exit 
points".[4] Reflecting, Spector felt that Deus Ex accomplished the intent of his 
manifesto.[1]

The Shooter design document set the player as an augmented agent working against 
an elite cabal in the "dangerous and chaotic" 2050s.[4] Its subtitle was 
"roleplaying in a world of secrets, lies, and conspiracies".[4] It was written 
to be similar in concept to Half-Life, Fallout, Thief: The Dark Project, and 
GoldenEye 007, and to mix elements of the films Colossus: The Forbin Project, 
The Manchurian Candidate, and Robocop in a world inspired by The X-Files and Men 
in Blackâ€”examples of "the millennial madness that's gripping the world ... and a 
general fascination with conspiracy theories and the desire to play with 
high-tech espionage toys".[4]

The preproduction team also tweaked the game systems. They chose a skill system 
that used nanotechnology augmentation, unique to the player character, as 
"special powers" instead of "die-rolls" or skills that required granular 
management.[9] They also built a conversation structure based on console 
role-playing game setups, and drafted the augmentation upgrade, inventory, and 
skill screens. They also designed an in-game text editor for taking notes, and 
"reward systems" for skill points, reduced weapon and tool cooldowns, and 
augmentation upgrades. Preproduction had generated 300 pages of documentation by 
March 1998. The document grew to 500 pages with "radically different" content by 
their April 1999 Alpha 1 deadline.[10] Of Spector's original design document, 
the marketing section was the only part left unedited.[8]
Production

In early 1998, after six months of preproduction, the Deus Ex project grew to a 
20-person team and entered a 28-month production phase.[6] Spector hired new 
staff in their Austin studio and was also assigned a Dallas-based art team.[10] 
The development team consisted of three programmers, six designers, seven 
artists, a writer, an associate producer, a tech,[clarification needed] plus two 
writers and four testers as contractors.[6] Chris Norden was the lead programmer 
and assistant director, Harvey Smith the lead designer, Jay Lee the lead artist, 
Sheldon Pacotti the lead writer, and Spector producer and director.

The team had many disagreements,[5] and Spector's original staff setup crumbled. 
When two experienced designers vied for the lead designer position, Spector 
chose both and made two design teams. He initially thought their competition 
would be easily managed and fruitful, but neither team felt second to the 
other[b] and Spector had to merge the teams and choose a single designer. He 
felt that the matrix management structure under which the Dallas art team worked 
for the project but were not the project's staff hurt the game's progress. Some 
of the artists were not interested in Deus Ex, and Spector wrote that "the art 
department drifted a bit".[7] He said that the matrix management structure 
created tension and problems, and was generally against the idea due to how it 
worked at his previous studios Origin and Looking Glass. Though his stance won 
out and the project received dedicated artists, Spector lamented that the game 
could have been improved for not having matrix management in the first place. He 
wrote that he learned about the importance of team member personal investment in 
the game, the preemptive benefits of addressing personnel concerns as they 
arise, and the usefulness of a chain of command even when consensus works.[7]

Spector described the team as interested in multiple genres of gaming, 
consisting of both maximalists who wanted to "do everything" and minimalists who 
wanted to do few things well.[10] Close friends who understood the team's 
intents were invited to test the game and give feedback. The wide range of input 
led to debates in the office and changes in the game.[10] In his postmortem, 
Spector concluded that the team was "unrealistic, blinded by promises of 
complete creative freedom" and by "assurances" of budget, marketing, and no time 
restraints, which he called "seductive traps".[11] By mid-1998, the game's title 
had become Deus Ex, from the Latin literary device deus ex machina ("god from 
the machine") whereby an impossible plot is resolved by an unpredictable 
intervention.[12] Spector acknowledged its grammatical faults as a title and 
added that he liked it because of the in-game struggle for power, the reference 
to the medium's own plot difficulties, the reference to the game inside a 
computer machine, and the "self-referential" acceptance of trying one's best to 
resolve affairs.[12] The game was published by Eidos Interactive and released on 
June 23, 2000 for Windows 95 and later versions. They also planned third-party 
ports for Mac OS 9 and Linux.[6]

Spector felt that the development process's highlights were the "high-level 
vision" and length of preproduction, flexibility within the project, testable 
"proto-missions", and Unreal Engine license.[13] Their pitfalls included the 
team structure, unrealistic goals, underestimating risks with artificial 
intelligence, their handling of proto-missions, and weakened morale from bad 
press.[14] He referred to that period of Ion Storm as "Sturm und Drang" with its 
degree of hype and as a target of vitriol following Daikatana's "suck it down" 
trash talk marketing and what Spector saw as negative press in 1998 and 
1999.[15] He said that his Austin team had "frequent" slumps in morale from 
taking the company's coverage personally and seeing their private emails posted 
online.[15] Spector wrote that "too many talented people" interested in Deus Ex 
did not join because they refused to work at Ion Storm.[15] He added that the 
company's notoriety did contribute to their press coverage from major outlets, 
more so than during his time at Origin or Looking Glass. Eventually, the Deus Ex 
Austin team developed a "'we'll show them' mentality" to distinguish their work 
and reputation from the Dallas-based Daikatana and Anachronox Ion Storm 
releases, which Spector considered toxic.[15][c]
World and character design

The original 1997 design document for the game privileges character development 
over all other parts, including experimental sequences and technology demos.[8] 
They wanted players to consider "who they wanted to be" in the game, and for 
that to be connected to how they behaved in the game.[4] In this way, the game 
world was "deeply simulated": real and common sense enough to be believed that 
the player may think about solving the game problems in creative and emergent 
ways without seeing distinct puzzles.[4] The developers also wanted "choice" 
with "consequence"â€”what Spector called the team's "two most frequently uttered 
words".[4] Their simulation was not able to maintain that level of openness, and 
the team had to force "skill", "action", and "character interaction" paths 
through the levels.[16] Spector compared this technique to the practices of 
Ultima's developers, though he felt his team did it "more consciously and ... 
effectively".[16] Spector later credited Konami's 1995 role-playing video game 
Suikoden as an inspiration, stating that the limited choices in Suikoden 
inspired him to expand on the idea with more meaningful choices in Deux Ex.[17]

The game changed greatly over the course of production, but parts that remained 
consistent include the augmented counterterrorist protagonist JC Denton. The 
anti-terrorism organization UNATCO was originally TLC, the Terrorist Limitation 
Coalition. Ally Tracer Tong was more of a "mercenary" than a "kindly anarchist", 
while enemies like UNATCO's Joseph Manderley went from "ruthless bastard" to 
"stuffy bureaucrat" and Majestic 12's Bob Page and assassin Anna Navarre played 
more of a background role.[8] Many of the original character ideas were reshaped 
to fit the final game design. The Majestic 12 organization originally intended 
to initiate a Mexican invasion of Texas and then suffocate the presidential 
cabinet by killing their oxygen supply. When this failed, their artificial 
intelligence kills the organization and retreats to outer space with nuclear 
weapons. Some of the plot and characters were brought to the final version, 
except that Majestic 12 is clandestine and focused on controlling the Internet. 
Though Spector originally pictured the game as akin to The X-Files, lead writer 
Sheldon Pacotti felt it ended up more like James Bond.[8] Spector himself called 
the game "James Bond meets The X-Files".[6] He wrote that the team overextended 
itself by planning such elaborate scenes, especially parts such as a replica of 
downtown Austin,[11] Area 51 reconstructed from satellite data,[16] a sunken 
post-earthquake Los Angeles, a raid to free thousands of prisoners of war from a 
Federal Emergency Management Agency-controlled United Nations concentration 
camp, and over 25 missions throughout Siberia, western Europe, and the United 
States.[16]

Designer Harvey Smith suggested a streamlined plot that removed the Mexican 
invasion to make development easier and the narrative more personal. While 
finished assets were repurposed, entire parts of the game were abandoned, 
including Texas and the Denver airport. Environments such as a flooded city 
became a Majestic 12 research site and the endgame Helios space station became 
Area 51. He also made the call to remove a playable mid-game White House level 
due to its complexity and production needs in other areas. Pete Davison of 
USgamer referred to the White House and presidential bunker as "the truly 
deleted scenes of Deus Ex's lost levels".[8] Spector referred to his "dream" 
level[16]â€”the White Houseâ€”as their "toughest map challenge".[18] The team has 
speculated that the assets may exist on a "DVDs in someone's attic", though 
Pacotti, Smith, Spector, and the final release have no trace of them.[8] Pacotti 
felt that the experience of rescuing Paul was worth cutting the White House from 
the game.[8]

Testing revealed that their idea of a role-playing game based in the real world 
was more interesting in theory than actuality.[18] They chose two real-world 
inspirations for levels: "highly interconnected, multi-level" spaces and places 
one cannot normally visit (such as the White House).[4] In practice, they felt 
that some functions of the real world, such as hotels and office buildings, were 
not compelling in a game,[18] and that "reality" always lost when up against 
"fun".[4] Their recreations of notable locations and items such as the Statue of 
Liberty and payphones were questioned when they did not emulate the actual site 
or function. Internally, the team began to doubt their investment in a 
non-player character-driven game as sufficiently interesting. Spector was swayed 
by this widespread sentiment to have "monsters and bad guys", and the team 
increased the prominence of several robots and added genetically-altered animals 
that still fit the story.[18]
Design

The game was designed to be "genre-busting"â€”partly simulation, role-playing 
game, first-person shooter, and adventure.[6] Spector intended for Deus Ex to be 
an "immersive simulation" similar to Ultima Underworld[5] by removing reminders 
of the game world such as interface or backstory.[6] He described the game's 
role-playing elements as the player-character becomes a "unique alter ego" built 
from the ramifications of their unique gameplay decisions.[6] Similar to a 
first-person shooter, the game uses a first-person perspective and includes 
shooting, but there are other non-violent gameplay options. Like an adventure 
game, Deux Ex is primarily based on a linear narrative story and item 
collection, though its puzzles are open-ended with many possible solutions and 
consequences. Ion Storm felt the game was about player expression rather than 
the appearance of the developers' ingenuity, and wanted to treat the player as a 
"collaborator" that they could empower to make choices and deal with 
consequences.[6]

Once implemented, the team's game systems did not work as intended. They built 
prototypes of the systems and some missions towards the beginning of 
development, which uncovered some of their blind spots.[10] For example, their 
early implementation of the conversation system and user interface afforded them 
enough time to revise by the final release.[11] They also found the 
augmentations and skills to not be as interesting in implementation as they 
seemed in the design document.[10] Developers from other companies, such as Doug 
Church, Rob Fermier, Marc LeBlanc, and Gabe Newell, identified these 
deficiencies in game "tension" when they played the prototype.[18] This led to a 
substantial revision of the augmentations and skills; Smith designed an 
augmentation per-use "energy cost" that led to energy refill rewards and more 
tactical play.[16]

Their milestones served as wake-up calls for the game's direction. A May 1998 
"proto-mission" milestone was to have a basic but functional demo of the crucial 
game systems and two maps (the White House and Hong Kong) ready.[18] The team 
worked on the riskiest parts of the game first such that the core game would be 
functioning, albeit not polished. The demo revealed that the size of their maps 
caused speed problems and would have to be divided into smaller maps. It also 
was one of the first signs that maps needed to be cut. The team forgot to 
prototype the non-player character artificial intelligence in this demo. A year 
later, in May 1999, they reached a milestone for finished game systems and the 
first two missions completed. While the player could start the game and 
character, use augmentations, acquire inventory, complete objectives, and save 
the game, their poor quality and comments from Newell led Spector to nickname 
milestone the "Wow, these missions suck" milestone.[18] They felt that their 
first demos showed their potential, but they were not nearly close to reaching 
it. This milestone also helped them estimate the work required for missions and 
the portions that worked best, which led to a trim of their 500-page design 
manual to the best 270 pages.[18] Spector recalled Smith's mantra here: "less is 
more". [19]

Smith had "an intimacy" with the level design tools such that he could sense 
when the design met the game's technical restrictions, like the maximum possible 
size or number of characters for a room. He suggested the narrower skill tree 
with palpable effects, such as exchanging skills about weapon damage for more 
accessible weapons.[8] The team adopted the cuts, having been encouraged by the 
recent milestone. Spector has said that had they waited for the beta to have 
made the same reductions (as per common practice), "it would have been a 
disaster."[20] Spector's post-proto-mission strategy was to bring the rest of 
the missions to proto-mission functionality rather than perfecting the two 
existing proto-missions. He felt that this would be a more efficient use of 
staff time, even if it meant that the final product would be more "bare-bones" 
than brilliant.[15] Almost all of their game systems besides the inventory and 
conversation schemes were rethought up through the end of the project.[21]

They also made choices about the minutiae of game mechanics. The team chose to 
pause the action while the player was viewing interfaces as to keep the strategy 
tactical, and to make the affinity of strangers and purpose of items "instantly 
recognizable".[21] Spector said that the issue of naming the player-character 
almost incited a "holy war", though they compromised and let the player choose 
in exchange for a common "code name and backstory".[21] They also saved the 
cinematic cutscene work for last so as not to repeat work as things changed 
during development.[21]

Spector wrote that the team did not figure out how to handle NPC AI until late 
in development.[11] This led to wasted time as the team discarded their early 
AI. They were also building atop their game engine's shooter-based AI instead of 
building a customized version anew to handle the spectrum of convincing emotions 
they wanted from their characters. As a result, NPC behavior was variable until 
the very end of development. Spector felt that their "sin" was their 
inconsistent display of a trustable "human AI".[11]